So for half an hour
I'm about to sit up here with my gloves.
Right. Good morning. So,
we've got you for about half an hour.
Yeah.
And we thought we'd
give you 10 minutes or so to talk about
the bill and your intentions, and then there'll be some questions.
Okay. Well, look, thank you very much, committee members, for allowing me to come
along. I just want to step aside
from
the kind of political frost at the moment
and take us to the core of the bill, what I think
I was doing.
And I want you to please believe, I go back on this
issue to about 1986,
'87, '88, when I first got involved with
where
industry meets environment, meets Maori Rights
Tribunal. So that, quite apart from my upbringing up near the 90 Mile
Beach, that was my first
introduction to where the different forces
meet each other in the fishery sector.
So,
most of what's in this bill, Mr. Chairman, other
governments have sought to do.
The thing that laid me low on the undersized fish,
it
was in the bill, if I can start there, because that's what's got me into trouble.
If I can start there. It was in the bill after my dear friend,
David Parker,
introduced it and put it in an earlier version of fisheries
legislation.
And on that question, what I thought I was doing, as a number of you have
hammered me for it,
is that if harvesters who have
quota catch fish,
either intentionally, unintentionally,
they should be required to bring it back to shore and it should come
off their quota.
Obviously, that's now canceled and dead after the Prime Minister
and various others responded to the viral campaign.
But from an international fisheries perspective,
which is why David Parker, because I rang him and asked him, "Why the hell did you
do this in the first place?" He said, "Well, Shane, I was advised internationally
that is the best way to change the behavior of
harvesters and penalize them because it will come off their legal
entitlement."
So, that's now gone.
So,
it probably wasn't well explained by me, but once, Mr.
Chair, it went viral, then we all piled in on it.
And then I met with the PM and Winston, that was it.
But I want everyone to know, there was actually a rationale to it.
Right.
So, if I can put that to the side. That's dead.
On the question of the cameras, and I want to address my colleagues on the Green
Party, for me, it's a constitutional principle
that the state is responsible for
undertaking enforcement action,
prosecutions,
or using the force of law to
penalize
or to take people into our legal courts.
It is not the NGOs. It is not the public.
So, I just want you to understand, that's philosophically what I've
explained to my colleagues.
And there's one other area I'd like to cover off, and then I'll just take
questions.
And look, I'm fully aware, Mr. Chair,
the bill won't pass unless it has a majority of votes.
But I do feel we do need to pass a bill of some
sorts because there are some legislative cliffs, which no
doubt, when I've gone, you can talk to the officials about.
However, the final other area which seems to have got
everyone highly agitated
is the ability
to carry an entitlement forward over multiple
years,
which you can do at the margin under the current law.
And we did look at doing this under COVID, for
example. That if there was disfigurement
in the capacity of people to catch fish,
Jacinda and us looked at whether or not you should carry the quota forward
into another year.
So, what I have put on the bill, or have got the
government to agree to put on the bill, is the capacity for us to
carry quota forward, and it still will be in
a set of guardrails that are defined by the
purpose of the act.
I unashamedly say to you that a lot of these ideas
have been driven by me because of my
concerns about productivity, efficiency,
contributions to enabling the industry to evolve,
which is an industry based on property rights.
I have a kind of war of words going with the
recreational sector.
But I want to say to you, nothing in this bill inhibits a
recreational man or woman from catching fish.
And we have the most permissive regime in the world for
recreational fisheries. We do not require
reportingWe do not even fully know
how much fish is taken out of the ocean by the recreational sector.
We have a model, but that model, I can tell you to the last
kilo how much fish that Sanford's catch.
Cannot tell you how much recreationals catch.
So they are defending an incredibly liberal and permissive regime,
and I suspect that in the future, another government will have to look at that.
But it's gunpowder for this minister, so I'll just park that here.
So anyway, that's my opinion.
Thanks, Minister. We'll go to questions. Uh, Teanau.
Yeah. Mōrena. My question is around
access to advice, access to information, so OIAs.
So as we know-
Yes
... in order for us to have a really good discussion, and I know
certainly for different people that have put in submissions, they'll want to have
the most up-to-date information.
We've had requests go in there that's past the 20-day
frame, and groups like, say, Legacy, are sort of wanting
to get that stuff. So my question is, will you
instruct your officials to release that?
Yeah. Okay, if I just start with
obstructing
the ability of people,
under the Official Information Act, to download the
camera footage.
Yeah.
This is why I say the camera footage can be made available for academic
study.
This is an OIA on advice to official services.
Oh, okay. Well, I'll work out what we're allowed to share.
Yeah.
I really don't care.
Okay, cool.
I'll just find out from Ray Smith and Emma
what the convention is. I'm not dodging your question.
Yeah, no.
And I'll just-
I just probably-
Yeah, I'll just work out with them the availability of
advice. Most of the advice I get, I spout it on the front page of the paper anyway.
I know. That's why people-
... want to have it.
But I don't want to put her on the...
Put Ray-
I'm happy to respond if that's-
Oh, fine. Yes, please.
So I understand there are quite a large number of OIAs with the ministry at the
moment, and most of the advice around that has informed the bill has
been made public already. But there are some additional
sort of briefings and advice that have been, I think that's going through its final
stages and should be released shortly.
How shortly is short? Is that days, months?
I'll need to check in with the team, but I imagine within the next few days, so we
can-
So next few days. He's keen to get it out.
We can update the committee when we have next committee this afternoon.
Okay.
I'll check on it. Yeah.
Rachel.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Minister. I've got a few lines of questioning.
Yeah, fire away.
So stop me when you feel you need to go to our members because we've got time.
So happy to kind of begin.
I've got two big concerns with the bill. I'll just put that up front.
And so I guess what I'd like to hear from you is where do you see the potential
changes in order to actually get some support around the parliament?
Because at this stage, if the bill looks like it does now,
it's
probably not going to pass in its next pace.
The two big pieces-
I have told my national friends the price will go up on the November 9th.
So
the two concerns I want to raise that
I'd love a response on,
the first is around judicial review.
And so I'll just-
Okay
... because I don't think that the changes made are
reasonable because actually, in New Zealand, we have an
approach where people can take judicial review.
I appreciate that it adds cost to industry, I appreciate it adds cost to
government, but the ability to do a judicial review on the
implementation of the act is actually an important part of our democracy.
Second question I've got, I'll just put the bloke up, is around the carry
forward. That's where I have my biggest concern,
and I appreciate that one of the things around fish stocks is
sometimes actually the interaction between the two.
If you think about snapper and kina, for example, is a great example of where
you've got one depleting and the other one growing, which then causes other issues.
So there is some benefit in having flexibility
around... I actually do appreciate that.
However, my concern is that we are getting good data
now on what's being taken.
I'm not convinced we still have good data on what is actually out there in the
waters that's still there.
And I don't think our data's good enough for us to be making some of these
decisions around carry forward. It concerns me that if quota has
been built up
over time
and not used, that then it allows a large
amount to be taken, and that could have a
massive impact on the fishery stock.
So I'm just not convinced we're there yet in terms of data.
So I'd just love a response from you.
Yeah, okay. Let's start with the High Court.
The Ministry of Justice do not agree
with what I advocated for in cabinet.
And God knows if there's an MP over his lifetime who's used the inherent
jurisdiction of the High Court to stop the state from doing things, it's me.
But I do think that
on the fisheries question,
it's become a blood sport.
And what I was trying to do was put some guardrails
around and some time frames
so that people, when they did challenge egregious cases of bad
decision-making,
that
it wasn't open-ended. Because at the moment,
I don't think it's reasonable that
Eli can reprise a decision from three or four years ago,
which is happening. And I'd rather that...
We did a little bit in the fast track, but not really.
And I accept that it's something that probably the
constitutional purists will want to change anyway.
But just going to be upfront with you, I don't want to block off the inherent
jurisdiction access questions to the High
CourtBut one day you guys are gonna be in
government. You really do not want what I'm seeing as a
proliferation of
litigants, basically weaponizing the
law as a basis for addressing a host of issues
that have very often nothing to do with
fisheries.
And that burden falls on the taxpayer, and then that burden is
often picked up by the industry. That's my philosophy.
But to your cardinal point, but shame you're defeating a
constitutional tenet. Mm-hmm. Maybe that's because
my original suggestion, which as you know, because you can see the
briefings, they don't like it,
maybe needs to be tempered. But I would plead with you to think about the
principle
of ensuring that when we allow
ongoing challenges to the
legitimacy of a statutory decision-maker,
that it's within some bloody air of reasonableness.
That's what I think. In relation to the
quota.
Look, Jim Anderton tried to do this in Helen's time.
Helen came in in '99,
and for a period of time,
Jim towards the end there. So this is
not novel, and I plead with you, go and talk to the people in Nelson.
Oh, I have been, don't you worry. And they'll tell you
that
it is an overdue innovation that's needed in the industry.
It is not going to compromise the total
allowable commercial catch, which is a percentage of the
total allowable catch.
And
is it something that I think is worth fighting for?
Yeah, I do.
Do I think that it represents a threat
to the sustainability of a stock? No, I don't.
But I fully accept that you should prosecute that issue with Emma and the
officials during the course of your hearings.
You had a sup.
Yeah, just a sup on the judicial review thing.
You were saying that we think that the committee should
think about tempering my point, and I take that point.
But we were just talking earlier around the concerns around the
release of official information.
And so that advice,
in this case, has taken more than 20 days.
So if you
restrict judicial review down to that 20 days, by the time you get useful
information, you can't use it.
I hear what you're saying about the balancing point, but- Well, Eva's come up with
a timeframe.
Emma will show you what the Ministry of Justice told me.
They almost had a stroke when they saw what I had ended up doing as this bill.
There's no reason why
we can't provide you with that information.
And I don't want anyone in this room thinking that
I'm negating what is a key feature of
our Westminster democracy, the inherent jurisdiction of the High
Court. I'm just asking you, one day you guys are going to be where I am,
to build some guardrails around it. That's all I'm asking.
And just one other thing around the
whistleblower kind of provisions, that if you do release information, you
get pinged up to $50,000. So you think that's a-
That's over the top, eh?
Yeah. Well-
By the way, they do as well.
Yeah. Okay. So
what's happening there and that's a
bit of a-
Oh, well. How does Donald Trump negotiate? Starts way up there and ends over here.
All right.
Yeah. But
when we
introduced the ear tag scheme,
you-
NAIT.
NAIT, yeah. You would remember
that there are strong protections about the privacy
of that information. That is currently in the law.
And what I wanted was to protect
the information from being used for purposes
which I do not believe are related or legitimate to fishing.
Mm. So therefore, it's the state who prosecutes my nephew when he's
smoking dope. It's the state who hauls
off my young fella for driving drunk.
Although a photo may have been taken of him at Coopers Beach and put up on
Facebook, that's the state's role.
And I can just see a period of time where a lot of this
footage, and no other industry, folks, has this level of
surveillance. No other industry.
As you know, philosophically, I'm opposed to it anyway, but I got overruled by
Cabinet, so that's now history. So if the state
has required this level of mass surveillance on boats,
then it's the state's role to guard that information and to use it to
effect the purposes of the statute.
Mm.
Good enough for the NAIT users, it's good enough for the fishing industry.
Sue.
You talked just briefly before about legislative cliffs,
that-
Pardon?
You talked about legislative cliffs.
Yeah.
That some of the legislation needs to be passed-
Yeah
... to avoid legislative cliffs, and I just wondered how many of them there are and
where might they reside?
I'll get Emma.
I'm not making it up. There generally are some.
Yeah.
But I'll get
Emma, who's the most senior person, given that Mr.
Bulger is away for a while.
They'll just give you a list of them.
And
if we don't tidy it up,
the Prime Minister and my leader and David Seymour said, "Right, we're
not bringing undersized fish back to shore.
That is not happening." Okay? If we don't pass a bill, it will be
happening.
You with me?
Yeah.
Simple as that. Now, I want it to happen.
Mm.
But it's the industry who's very happy
that the recs and the greens and all my other millions of
opponentsStopped undersized fish, including the
National Party. But what they don't realize, they've given the industry exactly
what they wanted all along.
They do not want to bring undersized fish back and have it come
off their quota.
But I spoke with the PM last night, told him I was coming.
He said, "Shane,
we are not reversing that decision.
I don't care about the rationality of what you and David Parker thought you were
doing. That's a done deal."
Rachel.
Thanks, Chair. I guess I just want to make, I guess, an
observation and a plea, which is around how we approach
this discussion. Because I think,
last night, great event led by Live Ocean, and a range of
views from industry through to iwi through to
NGOs.
Mm-hmm.
And I guess I just put to you, can you accept that I think everyone
involved in this conversation actually wants an abundant fishery
that can be used for commercial purposes and for the purposes
of individuals to be able to feed their whanau?
Yep.
And this is actually a plea to everybody
involved on all sides of the debate, that when we use inflammatory language
or don't meet with people who
are interested in this, that actually it sets us all
apart into a polarized conversation.
And can we actually do our best through this process to really
listen to the concerns and dive into the actual intent and the data?
That's my plea and question to you.
Yeah. I think that's fair enough. Let us, Steve.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just on the
camera footage, Minister.
The reason for such extensive surveillance in
commercial fishing is because of a long history
of breaches and exceedances of limits,
exceedances of law, dumping, all sorts of
questionable practices. Hauling up coral, and you name it.
Was it not for that footage-
Mm-hmm
...
there would be no evidential basis for either the state prosecuting
breaches or for the public to even know, because,
as we've seen from previous releases, reporting on
breaches was not accurate on the part of the commercial
industry.
Uh-huh.
So the question is, if this is publicly owned footage
belonging to the state,
why can the public not utilize it or see it to
understand what's going on in the fishery, including
advocates for better enforcement of the law and
advocates for protection of what is, after all, a commons?
Well, I
kind of agree with most of what you're saying, Steve,
but it comes down to trust.
Okay. I don't trust a lot of your fellow travelers.
Obviously, I trust you as a parliament. I'll be straight up with you.
I do not trust a lot of your fellow travelers.
I trust-
They probably don't trust you either, Minister.
Pardon?
They probably don't trust you either.
Well, Gary Taylor,
we agree to disagree. Russell has a stroke every time he sees
me. But put all that to the side.
What I'm asking, Steve, for you to consider is that we should
trust,
constitutionally, the people we put in a
position of power
to enforce through the powers of the state,
prosecutorial
or
legal decisions.
I don't think it's fair to my fellow New Zealanders that
indiscriminate footage be made available,
then weaponized,
then taken out of context
and unfairly used.
Because I would say the same thing should happen to his industry,
the cow industry, the calf industry.
And
I think that I accept the
coverage
changes behavior, but I'm asking you to,
as a parliamentarian, stay with the model.
The enforcement of the law in the country rests with the cops
and the regulators. Does not rest with Russell, doesn't rest with New
Zealand First. That's how our constitutional system works.
That, at the pith of what I'm saying, is probably
the hill that I'd die on.
Teanau.
Yeah. Actually, it was a sub on what Rachel was saying.
And I thought, well, because it comes down to social
license. In order for anything to happen, right, you've got to have enough people
in the country to be able to support that, and that's right across the fishery.
Yeah.
And I was at that event last night, and there are very strong
concerns around bottom trawling. Strong concerns.
People are opposed to bottom trawling.
So how's the balance going to happen, given that the social license
around that has evaporated?
Okay. So can I put it another way?
You and I, as Maori,
we don't have a social license, we have rights.
And I'm not surrendering those rights.
Those rights are the full and final settlement after a century and a
half of colonization.
I don't care about these modern innovations of social license.
I've got rights,
and I feel that social license is often used as a
convenient way
of smothering or circumventing the fact that there are rights.
So philosophically, that's where I come from.
Secondly, I had Jono and Blair in my
office yesterday, and I told the staff, "Look, whatever information,
unless I'm breaking the law, just give it all to them."In terms of the
granularity of what peak around the Chathams we're finding,
this is obviously a major surprise
to EMA. But if we're going to have a debate for the next
five, 10 years,
then let it be based on facts.
Mm.
And the fact that I put to you as committee members, 70% of the
fish in New Zealand is currently caught by
purse seining or dredging.
So, I don't think it's fair
to use social license
as a basis for smudging out
70% of an industry.
But
it is an easy out, as I told Blair and Jono.
I told Jono to go into politics, by the way. "You're 36 years old.
Stop swimming against the tide and hop into politics and go with the
tide."
And he probably thought, "Who's that fat old guy telling me what to do?"
So, I guess I'd say, Chair, that
I just cannot agree, guys. I
just cannot agree
that, um-
It's probably more a how you navigate it.
Pardon?
We're parliamentarians. We've got to... You know what I mean?
Yeah, but it just seems to me that-
No, I hear what you're saying
... if we want to stop, as I said, look, if we want to do stop
that fishing practice and those harvesting techniques, and I accept that there's a
burgeoning desire to do that,
then get ready on behalf of society to
purchase the rights back,
because we're making a moral judgment, some unseen coral
at some point in the ocean is of more importance to the
rights that we have. And I don't agree with you.
I just do not agree that some obscure coral has more moral
significance than my rights.
Look, Minister, they're trashing the ocean though.
Yeah.
They're destroying the fishery for their own-
And that coral plays a-
Hang on
Yeah
... Steve.
Yeah, let's just agree to disagree.
I do not believe that the level of destruction in the
New Zealand fishing industry
is anywhere at the catastrophic level that
Attenborough and all these other do-gooders depict it as.
And if that's the standard that we're going to run, then let's put
all the Kahikatea forests of the Hauraki Plains back.
Well, there's a point you can't put them back once they're gone.
Yeah.
That's why we're trying to stop it.
No, of course you can put it back.
We're trying to stop it-
You can close down farming and you can plant a trillion trees
And wait 1,000 years.
Exactly.
I've got to step on this because I just want to push back on that-
Last question
... which is,
the coral and what's on the bottom of the ocean plays a critical
role in actually ensuring the survivability of the stock.
And that's the point, is that if we do
continue to do the destruction, it-- And that's why I came back to that
comment I made, which was we all want a abundant fishery.
So I just have to push back. The role of the coral and what's on
the sea floor is important for spawning and ensuring we have
stock that we can go and fish to feed ourselves and the world.
But do you really believe, this is a great discussion,
does the Labour Party really believe
that we are presiding over an industry
which earns about $2 billion, so it's not an inordinately large
industry. Do you really believe that since
1986 we've been presiding over the
irreversible destruction of our sea floor?
I don't.
I think that that is actually a-
And I think it's been weaponized.
I disagree with you, and I think that if we continue down this path, that's when we
end up in a situation where we say, "Can we go back?" And if-
Oh, that's what we're going to-
And this is what we're here to discuss.
Yeah.
There is going to be consequences.
I'm sorry, we're running out of time.
Mm-hmm.
But, thank you very much for your time, Minister.
My feeling is
we should try and get the bill back into the House.
And then if it does help to pop along
and
at a more informal level to talk to my Labour colleagues, as
well colleagues, or I'm up for it.
Mm-hmm.
But if the bill is going to be so emasculated,
then what I think needs to happen, Mr.
Chair, is that, we need a bill of some sort because of certain
leaps of cliffs.
I'll be very disappointed because I regard
the fishing industry as being really important,
not only for food and protein, but as a key employer of
regional communities. And the ideas that I'm trying to
push forward, not all of them.
I take your point about judicial review.
They-- It's worth fighting for.
Thank you very much.
Okay, thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you, Minister.
Excellent. Right, we're going to move on quickly now.
We've got
New Zealand Meat Board
for half an hour.
So welcome, Nick, and welcome, Megan.
Morning, everyone.
Gidday.
Can you be as entertaining?
I was actually going to say, I'm sorry, because I won't be as entertaining.
Come on, now.
I did say to Megan, we should have actually come in here a lot earlier to answer to
that.
Look,
thanks very much and we'll leave it in your hands.
We've got half an hour, so
if you could leave some time for questions, that'd be really useful.
Yep, awesome. And good morning, and thanks for the opportunity.
My name's Nick Beebe, for those who I haven't met
I'm the chief executive of the New Zealand Meat Board.
And I'd like to start with a simple observation.
I've been working in this sector for about 25-odd years, and what I really
admire
is that New Zealand has always been constantly at the forefront of
agribusiness innovation around the world.
We've always been adaptable, pragmatic, outward-looking, and we've
always competed really successfully in some of the most high-value markets
around the world. But that success has never happened by accident.
It's enabled by systems, institutions, and decisions that were put
in place by those who came before us, by our parents and
grandparents, and earlier generations of industry leaders
who actually built the foundations that we continue to rely on today.
The New Zealand Meat Board is one of the clearest examples of that
legacy in action, and yet it remains something
of one of the best-kept secrets within the primary sector.
Many farmers that I speak to
are not fully aware of what the board does, and that's pretty
understandable because much of our work happens behind the
scenes. It happens at that interface between exporters,
global markets,
and governments, rather than directly on the farm itself.
But without the work that we do, the industry that we have today would look
very different.
And so to understand that, I'm just going to go back a little bit
in history, back to 1920,
'21.
They were extremely difficult years for New Zealand farmers.
The bulk buying arrangement with the United Kingdom that was
established during the First World War came to an end.
Product accumulated in storage, inventories rose, prices fell,
and a poor season compounded all that pressure.
Those years were a period of real uncertainty for our
farmers. But as we've seen time and time again in the sector, when
conditions get really tough, farmers respond.
And out of that period came collective action and a lot of foresight.
In 1922,
following swift legislative
change, the New Zealand Meat Board was established, and the first meeting was held
in Wellington of March that year.
At that stage, the Meat Board had representation from both farmers
and the government.
That decision, taken in response to a crisis, laid the
foundation for one of New Zealand's most successful export industries.
But over time, over the past 100-odd years,
the board's role has changed and evolved quite significantly.
In the early years, it was directly involved in marketing, promotion,
research and development, and a range of
activities on-farm, but also
within the meat plants as well.
And as the industry matured,
many of those functions shifted to other
organizations, particularly from the early 2000s,
to organizations such as Beef and Lamb New Zealand.
And so today, the system is far more specialized, with clear
roles across the sector. Government, industry bodies and
exporters focus on securing market access and negotiating trade agreements.
And once that access is secured,
the Meat Board steps in to implement and administer it.
That clarity of roles is important because it ensures clear focus and
reduces duplication and ultimately helps deliver
the best
possible returns to our farmers.
So today, the Meat Board focuses on three
core responsibilities, the first of which is to administer
quota.
We administer tariff rate quotas into high-value markets, which include the
US, the UK, and the EU. And these are
not abstract trade mechanisms. They are highly
valuable commercial assets.
Currently, the quotas we manage underpin more than $4.2
billion of export revenue, and annually we
deliver tariff rate savings of about $1.4
billion
per year. And that value flows directly back
through the supply chain and ultimately
underpins farmgate returns.
We now manage 10 quotas
for beef, sheep meat, and goat meat.
These include some of the older, more legacy WTO
agreements, but also the much newer
free trade agreements to the UK and the EU.
In the year to the 30th of September '25, export to these quota markets
increased by about 36%,
while tariff savings rose by about
60% compared to the previous year.
So these are very strong results, but they also
sit within a very
complex and volatile trading
environment.
Even in the last
18 months, we've seen really strong shifting demand
patterns, changing trade policies, and increasing geopolitical
uncertainty. So in that environment, the importance of these
secure, diversified market access arrangements
becomes
just actually critical.
An example of that, the weaker demand in China
over the past year,
that strength in our traditional markets has been critical.
High utilization of lamb quotas, strong demand for beef in the
US, and growing interest in the UK and the EU have helped
offset that weaker demand in China.So that's
the value of the flexibility
that we provide.
What New Zealand's current allocation provides-- so within China, some
of those developments include the recent beef
safeguard investigation and the new quota settings, and
that highlights the ongoing uncertainty in global trade.
And while New Zealand's
current allocation provides some headroom in the short term in China,
it also reinforces the need for constant monitoring and the ability to respond
quickly as conditions change.
So overall quota utilization strengthened in 2025 and has
remained strong in '26.
The second core area of responsibility for the Meat Board
is around the management of farmer reserves.
And I think this is another really good example of some of that long-term thinking
in action. The reserves
originate from surplus funds that were accumulated during New Zealand's bulk
meat supply arrangements with the UK during the Second World War.
And today they stand
at more than NZ$98 million, and they are held as a
contingency fund, a sort of a form of insurance for
the sector. Their purpose is really specific, is to support the
industry to help re-enter export markets following a major
disruption such as a biosecurity incursion or a significant loss of
market access.
And the importance of that role is not
theoretical. Events such as foot and mouth outbreaks
internationally serve as a constant reminder of the risks that our
sector faces.
In the event of a major disruption, the ability to draw on these reserves
could have a significant impact on restoring market confidence and supporting the
recovery.
The third area that I just wanted to cover
briefly is how we use that income from the reserves
to fund industry good investment.
And this is, I suppose, where the Meat Board's work does connect directly
with what happens on farm.
The board itself does not design or run research
programs itself. That role is taken up with
industry good organizations
like Beef and Lamb New Zealand. Instead, we actually assess the proposals,
consult with farmers and allocate funding to initiatives that will deliver
long-term benefits for the sector.
Since 2004, the board has committed more than $80
million to industry good programs.
I believe these investments have supported some of the most important
developments in the sector over the past two decades.
Research into pastoral greenhouse gas
consortia, which provides New Zealand farmers with knowledge and tools to help
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions.
We also were a significant investor into the Red Meat Profit partnership,
which delivered tools and systems that are widely used
today, such as the electronic animal status declaration form
and the New Zealand Farm Assurance program.
They were components of the Red Meat Profit partnership that we invested in.
More recently, the board has been supporting the Eliminating Facial
Eczema Impacts program, and we contribute up to
$1.5 million per year to a seven-year initiative to help eliminate facial
eczema,
which is a significant animal health challenge.
We've also committed funding to the Informing New Zealand Beef program, which is
focused on lifting the performance of the national beef herd through improved
genetics.
These examples
illustrate an important point. The reserve fund allows the
sector to invest in areas where there is market failure, where the
benefits are widely shared, but the incentives for individual investment
are limited, and genetics is a great example of that.
Improving the genetics requires investment at the breeding level,
but the benefits accrue often further down the production chain.
So without that collective investment up front, progress can be
slower than it should be.
So by investing in the front end,
we're ensuring that the industry continues to lift the
productivity and capture higher value in global markets.
That includes supporting technologies that allow farmers to benchmark and
improve performance using world-class genomic and pedigree data.
These results have been transformational in the sheep sector and are now
being extended into beef.
All of this sits
within a strong statutory and governance framework.
The board operates under the Meat Board Act of 2004.
We're required to administer and manage quota systems that are efficient,
transparent and fully compliant with New Zealand's international
obligations. This means delivering systems that are accurate,
reliable and trusted by both exporters and our trading
partners, and this is often recognized
by our international trading partners.
It also means maintaining the integrity of New Zealand's quota access,
something that is critical to our international reputation and relationships.
Over the past year, we've taken a really detailed look at our systems
to ensure
that they provide the most integrity
and are incredibly resilient. So we're now rebuilding our quota
management platform to ensure it's modern, secure and fit for
the future.
We're also working with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Ministry
of Primary Industries to improve our data sharing
with key partners such as the European.
None of this is really high profile.
A lot of this
sits behind the scenes, but it's actually critical to maintaining the credibility
and effectiveness of our
systems.The strength of the... Pretty much just
finally, the strength of the board also lies in our governance.
It brings together farmer-elected directors,
processor and exporter representatives, and government
appointees on the board. And these government appointees
are particularly important because they all bring deep expertise in
international
trade.
This combination ensures decisions are grounded in both practical
farming experience and providing a clear understanding of global
market dynamics.
So just really stepping back,
all the systems that we rely on today did not happen overnight.
A lot of them were grounded back into those very early years of
1920 and '21.
The Meat Board is part of the legacy of the red meat
industry, and that continuity matters, because while
the context changes, whether it be shifting consumer preferences
or the real global geopolitical tensions that we see or the
biosecurity risks that may happen, the need for strong trusted
systems remains constant.
So look, I'm just going to leave it
there. I just wanted to
provide a bit of a background into the New Zealand Meat Board because
as I said, it's not really that well understood, but plays
a critical role within our industry.
Thanks, Nick. We've got a question from Suz.
Thanks, Nick. Good to see you again, and congratulations.
Thanks, Suz.
Hey, you talked about $1.4 billion
in savings, and I just wondered, in tariff savings.
So are you just referring to the actual trade
deals that that comes from or your administration of those trade deals?
The administration of those trade deals.
So that relates directly to the tariff rate savings
that-
So it's the trade deals that have saved the $1.4 billion-
Yes
... and you're administering those saved deals?
Yes.
And-
And so that value goes up and down depending on the volume of product that goes-
Oh, so you're maximizing the quota is what you're saying, so that we get the most
out of the trade deals that we can.
Yes.
Okay. Oh, that's clarified it. Thank you.
And then, you didn't mention the UAE trade deal. Are you doing that one as well?
No.
How come?
There's no
quota. So for New Zealand Meat Board to administer a
quota, and Megan might have to help me out here,
because this is relevant, I suppose, a little bit with
China.
There is no domestic administration within-
And so that's the same reason that you didn't talk about China?
Yes.
Okay. And then the-
They haven't allowed for that domestic administration in New Zealand.
Okay. And then the only other thing I was going to ask was that, is there a bit of
an overlap with you and Beef and Lamb?
Uh-
Like, should you be together rather than you...
I'm just talking about the administration of that fund, and then you then hand the
money over.
Are you not intrinsically linked?
Are we double-handling admin and having-
No
... two lots of admin costs?
No.
Two lots of-
No. We're very clear on that and it's...
So the Meat Board does procure some services off Beef and Lamb New Zealand to
ensure that there is no duplication.
So some of the backroom finance and things like that.
But should you all be in the bed together rather than sharing a room?
No.
We have very different responsibilities and
the fund itself, I suppose if you think about Beef and Lamb New Zealand, that gets
voted
in or out-
Out. Yeah
... every six years. We administer what is now
about a $98 million
fund that has really long-term implications.
And the same thing with the quota administration.
They cannot
be voted in or out. The function
of the Meat Board
is a legacy that must be maintained and shouldn't be up
for that vote.
Oh, no, you've explained that really well. Thank you.
So 98 million, that's
grown quite a bit in the last few years, which is good because
we'd need
all of that and more if there was a foot-and-mouth outbreak or
whatever.
So
how are you growing it? And then do you have a
sum that you've got as the
absolute minimum?
Yeah.
A really good question, Miles, and it's a topic of discussion with the
board right at the moment. So we have a reserves policy,
which the board review every three years.
If I talk about the management of that fund per se, that's governed
under
the strategic investment strategy,
which
the board works very closely with two institutions,
Cambridge Partners, to help the board design that investment strategy, and then JB
Were, the fund managers that actually invest or implement
that strategy. And they report back to
the board every quarter on the performance
of that fund. And it has grown,
and we benchmark ourselves against a whole range of performance measures to ensure
that we're actually investing and delivering really good returns out of it.
That fund has grown significantly,
but it is a very volatile
investment market right at the moment as well.
So we expect to see a bit more volatility in the
next period.
Yeah.
In terms of the minimum... amount that we have.
So we have what we call a ring-fenced amount for
contingency,
which
is, I suppose that
to help the New Zealand sector get back into export markets,
and that
amount at the moment is 69.8 million.
That is CPI index over year, that will go
up with inflation. But that is currently under
review from the board.
Okay.
And sorry, I should say at the moment as well,
that is solely to help New Zealand get back into export
markets.
Yes.
It's about supporting the trade
and ensuring that customers and the trade overseas actually understand
what's driving or what makes New Zealand grass-fed beef and lamb
special.
And
so I assume a portion of the return
on that investment, that 98 million goes into
R&D or whatever,
and portion goes back to CPI and just the-
Correct.
So, do you have any other income?
So we're a cost recovery business.
Yes.
So the quota side of the business is all cost recovery
from meat processors. And as mentioned
in there, everything is very open and transparent.
We're a small team,
a very small team, and keeping costs as low as
possible and being as efficient as possible is a key thing because
the meat companies do have to cover all of our activity.
Okay, just one last question from me, and then we'll go to Steve.
The quota
used to be basically it was a free-for-all.
Anyone could have a quota even if they weren't an exporter.
And I know there was some re-management of that or-
So-
How does it work now?
Yeah. Yep. So
that's another function of the board is we review our quota allocation
mechanisms every three years? Five years. Five years.
A lot of the
WTO quotas, we allocate them based on production history.
So that means that if you're a
company,
and you're
processing
15% of the sheep and goat meat in New Zealand,
your quota, this is at a very high level, your quota would be,
our allocation would be 15%.
With the new WTO
quotas,
we have changed that allocation methodology around based on some
extensive consultation right across
the sector, and we call it a hybrid allocation mechanism, which
includes production history but also export history.
So there were companies that were exporting beef into
the UK,
that a production history
allocation mechanism would've ruled out of accessing that quota.
So we've changed that to ensure that those companies also were recognized.
But no longer is there
people with quotas that aren't actually exporting and those quotas
are worth a lot and they were basically-
Yeah. So there's two-
... selling them to other businesses.
Two points I'll make there. I should have said that within those quotas there
is always an allocation for new entrants.
So we want to encourage innovation within the sector and encourage
new entrants in, so there's always
an allocation there for new entrants.
Quota is tradable,
and that means that
companies who
for some reason might choose not to sell into a
quota market, they might have customers that are generating a higher return in a
market that's not quota, they can then sell that quota
to someone else who does
want it. So it is tradable,
and the value, the board itself,
we obviously keep track of all that because we need to, and
we need to know exactly who has the quota, but we don't
collect any revenue from that transaction.
Is there still a danger of
businesses
not exporting really, but having quota and just-
So we strongly-
Clipping the ticket, if you like-
Yeah
... on selling the quota to someone else?
Yes, there is always that
danger. We
ensure that if a company is not using it, we have a
hand-back mechanism.
So those companies that might not have used that quota,
they have an obligation to hand back any unused
portion of that quota back to the board and then we can reallocate it
out. If a company chooses not to do that,
we
will penalize them and take quota,
remove quota off. That's always a board decision.
Yeah.
Yep.
Okay.
Steve.
Mine's a somewhat nuanced question around that
reserve you have, and what are the parameters and guidelines
around
where you invest it? Do you have
a fixed amount you invest locally or do you have any
Sort of strategies or
policies around that, that you're happy to share. You may not be.
Yeah.
So you're talking about the investment into industry good or-
No, I mean your fund-
Yes. Sorry
... have what investment-
Yeah, that is all laid out in a,
in the investment strategy.
Yeah.
I couldn't go into all the detail of that just actually off the top of my head.
Of course. Yeah
But that is
reviewed by the board very regularly-
Mm
... to ensure that...
I suppose we've got to generate
enough money from the fund to cover the
CPI increases, and
yeah. But I'd have to, sorry, I would have to get back to you-
It's all good
... with more detail.
If you're happy to share that, I mean, there may be stuff that's-
Yeah, I would be very happy to share that.
Thank you. Susan.
You talked about one of the things you cited that you're investing in as the,
was it some sort of,
green
initiative? No, to do with-
Pastoral-
Yeah, that's it
... pastoral green.
So do you measure those results? Like, how's it going?
So that
one has finished.
With all the investments that we make,
a lot of them
have been tied with investment from Beefram
and from MPI as well.
So if you ever think about eliminating facial eczema, that's-
Yeah. Oh, okay. So I was, that was my question.
Yeah. It's-
So you're all linked in together. So often it's the
reporting back is done by another agency essentially.
Yes. That goes through the MPI SCCC
fund. So we try not to duplicate-
Nice
... the reporting or anything like that, but that is
reviewed.
Our investments in
this long-term research are always reviewed annually by the board as well,
because they have got a role in
governing that investment, ensuring that it is returning exactly what
it set out to achieve.
Okay, and one other quick question.
Do we export, this is quite random, do we export lamb to Australia?
I don't think... Last time I, I don't think so.
Oh, mate. Why not? Because we have to put up with theirs here.
Look, it was
probably not so much for the Meat Board because it's not a quota market,
but I do remember about probably five or six years
ago, there was growing interest from a few companies about the
Australian market.
So would that be in your hood, so to speak?
No. No, it's not in our hood.
No. Okay.
It's a transfer system. We send them people, they send us
lamb.
No.
Yeah. It's not in our hood. That's a purely commercial arrangement for the
companies.
Okay. So it's not-
Yeah.
See, yeah. Okay.
Thank you very much.
Any further questions?
No.
How should I get back? Do I just send-
Just send it to the committee.
Yep.
If you can.
Because that would be useful for all of us, I think.
Or is it available online anyway?
Is it available online? I'll make sure-
The link will be fine.
Look, everything that the Meat Board does is pretty much online.
We
have to be,
and we just actually want to be transparent.
So
awesome.
Cool. Thank you, Nick.
Thank you very much. Thanks for your time.
Good to see you.
Yeah, very good.
Thank you very much.
Right, so we're moving on to briefing on the Plants
Biosecurity Index concerning carnivorous plants.
Now this is-
It was interesting actually when I read it.
Yeah, it is. This is
quite an interesting topic.
So if we could bring... Are they online, are they?
I'll just wait until we see them.
No
problem. So are they online?
Yes, they are. Back in two
rounds.
Good morning, Ryan. How are you? Welcome to the Primary
Production Select Committee.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Thank you for having me.
No problem.
Do we have Ross online as well?
He's here.
He will be joining momentarily. I'll just
let him know that we've started.
Moment is-
He needs to accept the invitation from the
clerk to be promoted to
a panelist.
SoDo
we have Alan Wombek in person or is he on- No, he's on phone.
On the phone. That's fine.
That's fine.
Sat by my left.
Oh, classic.
Now we try once more.
Oh, I see. They're dialing in phone.
Mr. Chair, if you like, I can start with my side-
Yes, please
... while we wait for Ross to
get in.
Yeah, in the interests of time, if you could-
Sure
... kick off, please, Ryan.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today and to present on this matter. My name is Ryan Rothschild.
I am speaking on behalf of a community of carnivorous plant growers
and enthusiasts across New Zealand.
I am joined by Ross Taylor, who has over 40 years of experience in this field,
including commercial cultivation and longstanding engagement with the
regulatory environment surrounding these plants.
We appreciate the committee's time, particularly given the wide range of
competing priorities you are tasked with addressing.
While our subject may appear niche at first glance, the issues we
raise go beyond a single plant group.
They speak directly to the integrity, consistency, and practical
workability of an important regulatory instrument, the Plant
Biosecurity Index.
At the center of our submission is a simple but significant problem.
The current Plant Biosecurity Index is incomplete in a way that
creates legal ambiguity, administrative inefficiency, and
unintended consequences for both regulators and the
public.
When the index was established in 1998, it was not compiled as a
comprehensive inventory of all plant species present in New Zealand at the
time. Instead, it relied largely on input from major commercial
growers and hobbyist societies, with a focus on
species actively traded in the market.
As a result, a substantial number of species, particularly those held
within smaller specialist communities, were never captured,
despite, in many cases, having been present in New Zealand for decades
prior.
Carnivorous plants are a clear example of this gap.
Based on the work we have undertaken over the past two years, the current
index includes approximately 178 species and
hybrids across 13 genre. However, the
evidence indicates that potentially upwards of
289 species across 14 genre were
already present in New Zealand prior to the index's inception,
but a great many were not included.
This is not a marginal discrepancy, but a massive structural shortfall.
In its current form, the Plant Biosecurity Index is not fit for purpose
as it relates to carnivorous plants.
That shortfall now gives rise to several serious and ongoing issues.
Firstly, there is the risk that there is unfair or
inconsistent enforcement. Individuals may be
cultivating and sharing plant species that have been present in
New Zealand for more than 30 years.
Yet, because those species are not listed, they may be exposed to
investigation or enforcement action.
In effect, the legality of their actions hinges not on biosecurity
risk, but whether a historically incomplete list happens to include the
species in question.
That is not a stable or equitable basis for regulation.
Secondly, there is a clear and avoidable cost to government.
The Ministry for Primary Industries is required, in some cases,
to investigate individual plants and collections to
determine whether the plants contained therein are lawfully or in New
Zealand or can be proved as having been present prior to
1998. They try to do this using the same
incomplete list, and the burden falls onto individual
collectors to prove the origins of plants held in their collection.
This is grossly unfair, is resource intensive for MPI,
time-consuming, and ultimately inefficient.
It diverts attention and funding away from higher risk biosecurity
priorities and places pressure on already constrained
systems. It also contributes to a loss of trust
between MPI and the people it services and investigates.
Thirdly, the current situation is contributing to the loss of
plant diversity within New Zealand.
Many longstanding private collections, some maintained over decades,
are not being propagated or shared.
Owners are understandably cautious about distributing material that may
expose them to legal risk or even admitting that they still hold it.
Over time, this leads to the quiet erosion of genetic diversity,
and that has been preserved in the country, often through the
dedication of private individuals rather than formal
institutions.
Fourthly, and importantly, it affects the credibility of the index itself.
A regulatory framework depends not only on its intent, but on
confidence in its accuracy and completeness.
Where it is widely understood within a sector that an underlying list is
materially incomplete, that confidence is diminished.
This has implications not only for compliance,
but also for the quality of decision-making that relies on the framework.
We also wish to highlight a practical barrier to resolving this issue under the
current system.
We have been advised that updating the index through standard processes may
involve costs of several thousand dollars for each species,
which would be payable by members of the community who seek to pursue
certain species being added to the list.
That model may be workable in large, commercially driven sectors
such as mainstream horticulture or agriculture.
However, it is not realistic for a small, largely non-commercial
community such as ours.
As a result, a known deficiency in the system remains unaddressed,
not because of lack of evidence, but because of lack of financial
capacity.With the list being so massively incomplete,
the burden is insurmountable for individuals or small groups of people with
a vested interest. Inevitably, this creates a black market
whilst penalizing those who are compliant with the law.
Despite these challenges, we have made substantial efforts to engage
constructively and in good faith.
Over the past two years, we have compiled a detailed and evidence-based body of
work to support the inclusion of these historically present species.
This includes records from botanical gardens, historical society
publications, and affidavits from individuals involved in the
original compilation of the lists, as well as longstanding growers
and operators.
Despite all of this work, our efforts have been mostly
unsuccessful because they say that the system puts the cost
of updating the list onto the consumer.
This position compounds all of the issues referred to
previously. MPI appear to have little appetite to
review their own tool, despite it being demonstratively inadequate and
incomplete.
Through this process, which has taken years, just eight additional species were
added to the index in 2023. Whilst that was a positive
step,
even this little success created a further issue.
Those species were simply placed in a requires assessment
category. This means that although they are now recognized,
they are not fully functional within the system.
For example, they can still not be readily imported due to the
absence of assigned import health standards.
From the perspective of those attempting to comply with the law in this country,
such bureaucracy simply penalizes meaningful and constructive
engagement, as essentially nothing is achieved despite full
cooperation with the statutory body and legislation.
This is not in keeping with the purpose and spirit of the Biosecurity Act, and
further erodes confidence by collectors in the system.
Thus, many avoid it at all costs and many end up
operating illegally through no real fault of their own, particularly if
they've held such plants for decades.
More broadly, we have been advised that there are thousands of species awaiting
assessment, with some being expected to remain in the queue for decades due
to resource constraints and prioritization towards larger
commercial interests. Despite this, the list is still being used
by government departments to justify decision-making, to inform
investigations and even prosecutions, and to limit or even
completely curtail trade.
This brings us to our recommendations.
We are not seeking to introduce new species into New Zealand,
nor are we advocating for any weakening of biosecurity protections.
We are fully in support and,
sorry. We fully support the purpose and importance of those protections.
Rather, we are asking for the system to accurately recognize what is already
here. Specifically, we ask that the committee supports a
process whereby the Plant Biosecurity Index is
updated to include species that can be demonstratively shown to
have been present in New Zealand prior to its inception, and that
those species are processed through the system
to have the necessary administrative steps completed to be
assigned the appropriate and functional status within the system,
including allocation of import health standards where applicable.
In doing so, we believe the committee would be supporting a more
coherent alignment between the Environmental Protection
Authority, the Plant Biosecurity Index, and the Ministry
for Primary Industries.
We ask that Parliament place the burden of ensuring that the list is fit for
purpose and up to date onto MPI and not
individual people, as doing so is in the best interests
of everyone and adds credibility and fitness for purpose to an existing
framework tool. It would also reduce unnecessary administrative
burden, improve regulatory clarity, and help prevent both
loss of biodiversity and the risk of unjust outcomes.
Finally,
we would emphasize that this submission is made in a constructive spirit.
Our community is committed to operating within the regulatory
framework and to supporting the objectives of New Zealand's biosecurity
system.
Our concern is that the current framework in the specific
respect of this does not fully reflect reality,
and that this gap can be and should be addressed.
Mr. Chair, members of the committee, thank you again for your time and
consideration. I will now conclude my remarks and invite any
questions you may have. If you have any questions, my friend and
colleague, Ross Taylor, will be happy to answer them.
He is one of New Zealand's longest-serving collectors of carnivorous plants.
He has spoken at numerous educational institutes and owns and operates
a specialist nursery devoted to carnivorous plants, and has
done so for almost 30 years. He was also one of the contributors
to the list back in the 1990s when the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries was compiling the list.
Thanks very much, Ryan, and welcome, Ross.
After initial technical issues.
You're on mute.
So we'll go to first question with
Jo Luxton.
Oh, good morning. Thank you very much for your submission.
I found it a really interesting topic.
It's not one that's actually been brought to my attention before.
I was interested to know in your written submission that you talked about
the fact that MPI had said for you to update the register,
that it could be in the cost of tens of thousands of dollars.
Have they indicated to you why it would cost so much?
Yes, they have. First of all, thank you
again for the opportunity to come, and I apologize for the technical issues.
I think it was to do with the fact that I was not connected as a panelist,
rather as an attendee. So hopefully you can hear me now.
Can you just confirm that you can?
Yes, we can
Okay, good. Thank you. Okay, the reason that it costs so much is because it's on a
per species basis. And so each species that gets added to the
list, there's a process that it has to go through.
And ordinarily, of course, when species get added, it's for commercial
intent.
So a major wholesale nursery, for example, might
choose to bring in a new species of hydrangea.
It's got massive commercial merit,
and therefore it has to be assessed for the New Zealand
ecosystem and also for the New Zealand Biosecurity Index.
And so the issue is that with all the plants that we grow,
they're not commercially viable. You wouldn't make anything out of them at all.
That's why nobody has.
But they are here nonetheless. They're already in New Zealand.
And so the problem is, is that because each one has to be
assessed, the cost is the same per species,
irrespective of whether it has commercial intent or not.
Okay. So when it is to be assessed, what is the
expense of assessing it? Is it
the process that it must go through?
Yes. There's a bureaucratic process that it goes through within MPI to get added to
the list, and also in theory there is. It doesn't always happen.
I'll talk about that in just a second.
But yes, there is a commercial process within MPI.
And also, there is some talk about it being assessed for the
environmental impact as well.
Okay.
And so those are two things. That being said, none of the species that are
currently on the list have ever been assessed.
They were added when the list was created.
And in fact, within the realm of carnivorous plants, there's a whole genera called
Pinguicula, of which, if you look at the list, there's probably about 100 or more
species on that list. Well, not one of those was ever assessed.
The only reason they're on the list is because there was a member of the
Carnivorous Plant Society that happened to be a chief botanist for MPI,
and he loved Pinguiculas, and so he added them all to the list.
Mm.
That's the only reason that they're there.
Okay, now the fact of the matter is, is if he'd loved all the rest of the genera as
well, they'd all be there, but none of them are.
Thank you.
Steve,
is it a question of there being a broader public good and us having a
better track on
these exotic plant species and what their potential risks are
to biodiversity outside of any commercial use?
And therefore, are you alluding to there being a
need for some public investment in this?
Well, I think it's a fair question.
Whenever you bring a plant into a new ecosystem, there's always some level
of risk. It doesn't matter what the plant is.
With carnivorous plants, there's some risk.
Obviously they dwell in wetlands,
and so there have been other plants, for example, that have been
imported into New Zealand in the past that have become invasive.
And so I totally agree that there is a basis for the Biosecurity Index.
The fact of the matter remains that the list as it stands is incomplete.
These plants have been in New Zealand since the 1960s, the ones that we're
advocating to be added.
And it's simply the fact that, yes, it would be probably quite expedient for there
to be a full process for every single species that's in New Zealand, of
every plant, carnivorous and non-carnivorous alike.
But the fact is, there's literally thousands upon thousands of plants that have
never been assessed.
The only reason that these plants that we're advocating for are not on the list
isn't because they haven't been assessed, it's because they weren't added to the
list in the first place when the list was first developed.
And I can talk to that point as well.
So
are you suggesting that
there should be a process for simply adding plants to the list that are known to
be in New Zealand, independent of the assessment of
them?
Essentially, if plants have been here for a very long period of time, and they can
be proven to be here, and we have affidavits from botanical
gardens, we have affidavits from longstanding collectors, people like
myself that have been growing for 40 years-
Yeah
... people that have
connections to the Auckland Botanical Gardens, the Christchurch Botanical Gardens.
If they come from credible sources, even carnivorous plant
journals dating back to the 1980s and 1990s.
If it can be demonstrably proven that these plants have been here for 30 or 40
years, then the fact is whether they're on the list or not,
they're in the country and therefore they should be on the list.
Otherwise, the list is not fit for purpose.
Now, we're not advocating bringing in new plants.
We're not advocating bringing in new varieties.
We're advocating documenting what's already here in a complete way,
not a scatterboard approach to
bureaucracy. Rather make the list fit for purpose.
Mm.
Has--
Oh, Shane, sorry.
Thank you. Unfortunately, I know very little about this, but can I just clarify
that there are indigenous carnivorous plants?
And then secondly, what is the most common carnivorous plant, and what does it eat?
Well, it depends on where you're talking about in the world as to what's the most
effective one and what they eat. But yes, within New Zealand there are-- Well,
depending on where you draw the line in terms of the
species, there's between seven and 14 species.
Some books advocate up to 14 species. Others limit it to seven.
And it depends largely on your taxonomy, where you draw the line.
But within New Zealand we have Drosera, which are sundews.
There are Utricularia, which are commonly known as bladderworts.
The sundews catch midges, mosquitoes, and sandflies.
The bladderworts tend to catch microscopic insects
in the soil.
But in terms of what's an effective carnivorous plant, probably the most effective
would be Sarracenia, which are North American pitcher plants.
Those are already on the list, and they're in New Zealand in most
collections.
So can I just confirm that there are seven to 14 indigenous carnivorous plants?
Yes, that's right.
Thank you.
That-
Are there any examples of the-
Exotic plants that are already in New Zealand
becoming invasive in any of our
ecosystems?
Yes. In fact, one of them is on the New Zealand Plant Pest Accord.
In fact, a couple of them are.
There's Drosera capensis,
which is a South African sundew. It's related through
the genus to the New Zealand
sundews, the Droseras here. But Drosera capensis did become
invasive.
For that reason, it was added to the New Zealand Plant Pest Accord, and it's been
managed by MPI ever since. But that plant is on the list,
ironically, as is Utricularia gibba, as is
Utricularia,
not monanthos,
livida.
These are all species that are well and truly established in New Zealand.
I guess the point is, is the New Zealand Plant Pest Accord list is a separate
list to the list of what's currently in the
country. If they have a risk of becoming invasive, they go on
the Plant Pest Accord list. If they're simply in the
country, they go on the list of plants that we're advocating should be updated to
record what's accurately here,
and actually here.
Okay. Suz.
So just-
Last question
... backing up the track a little bit.
With the
ones that are here that are not registered, that are exotic,
were they then brought in... I imagine if they were brought into the country
legally, then you would've had to have some record that you were bringing them in.
So have they all come in sort of under the radar, so to speak,
and now they're established?
Not at all, no. So back prior to 1998, when
this current list was updated, there was no list of what was in the country.
And to import plants, all you had to do was apply to the Ministry for Ag and
Fish, as it was in those days,
and
you'd make your application for a permit.
In those days, there was no such thing as CITES, which is the Certification of
International Trade of Endangered Species.
And in those days, you didn't even need phytosanitary certificates to prove that
they were safe and clean. So literally, when I was a
child, you would simply phone up the nursery over in
Britain or America, wherever they came from, and they'd be on the next plane out.
And I can remember as a 10-year-old boy, getting a box of plants coming
to New Zealand that were filled with insects that were alive.
And they arrived-
Jesus
... into the country on that basis, and my father looked at them and he said,
"Well, this is a bit odd. We should phone Ministry for Ag and Fish." So we did, and
they said, "Oh, just chop them off.
It'll be all right."
That's how it was in those days. It was a totally different
sort of situation to these days, where there's obviously rules for everything.
So again, it's not that these plants that are already here have been brought in
illegally, not at all.
Yeah.
They've been brought in perfectly legally, in some cases dating right back as far
back as 1950. The earliest one goes back to 1950.
The other ones since then are mostly between 1950 and 1985,
'86, and that kind of era. That 35-year period is when most
plants were brought in, and mostly it was done by the botanical gardens
overall.
Right. But MPI or whoever at that time never thought to put them on
the list when they came into the country.
They didn't add to a list of known species that were in New Zealand.
There was no list-
Okay. Thank you very much, Ross
... in existence at the time.
Yeah.
Steve, last question.
Very final question. Are you aware of the excellent Auckland band
called the Carnivorous Plant Society?
Yes.
You have no issues of them taking your name?
It doesn't matter too much.
I would just like to make one final point, and that is just, I've become aware of
time, and that is to simply say this.
That back when the list was first put into operation by
MPI, they did not go around most of the collectors in New Zealand
to find out what was in New Zealand.
What they did do was go to the carnivorous plant societies, and they
asked the societies what we were currently growing for
sale. That was the issue, okay. Now, I was asked personally at that time,
the request to me came through the Carnivorous Plant Society.
And so I made a list of what I was selling, but I did not make a list of
what I had. Now, these days, I don't have those species.
I no longer am commercial in that sense.
But back in those days, I had hundreds of varieties that I don't have now.
And those plants are still all around New Zealand.
They've been here for a very long time.
And so the question that was asked was actually probably the incorrect question.
They asked, "What are you selling?" Rather than, "What are you growing?"
And bearing in mind back then, nobody knew what the list was going to be used for.
We were simply told that they were building up a list of what was currently
available for sale in New Zealand.
That's morphed from being what's available for sale to what's available,
period. And then it's being used to police people, so that now people
that have plants that aren't on the list are demonstrably
compromised. They're scared to even say what they've got,
because the question is, where do they come from?
And of course, you have to be able to prove where they've come from.
Well, these plants have been here for a long time, and all we're saying is that the
list needs to be brought up to date to make it relevant and to make it complete.
Okay. Thank you very much, Ross. We've come to time.
Really appreciate both you and Ryan
taking the time to inform us of the issues.
And we will
keep you posted as to what our
plan of attack is, I guess.
Yeah.
Thank you very much, Miles.
Thank you.
And again,
thank you for facilitating and recommending this process. Appreciate that a lot.
Thank you.
Right. We've got-
Thanks, Ryan.
We'll just wait for the...
Do we have any deliberation time now?
Yes.
We do.
Yeah. Right. So we've
got-So,
we've got
Alan scheduled for 15 minutes.
Yes. And we've left a 10-minute buffer at the end.
We are.
There's
a talk, isn't it?
Oh.
Keep it up to your mouth.
Keep in the sun.
Mm.
Keep your phone on there.
Hello?
On that side.
Are you there?
Hello?
Hello.
There?
Yes, we're there. Can you hear us?
Yes, we can. This is Alan Wallbank.
Thank you, Alan. I'm Miles Anderson, I'm the chair of the Primary Production
Select Committee, and we've got my colleagues here with us.
So, we're very interested in hearing your evidence.
So we've got 15 minutes. If you could
give your presentation, bearing in mind that
time will go fast and we'd really like to ask some questions.
So, fire away.
Now, I've got two other members of the local community here with me.
Yep, that's fine.
Got Pete.
Yeah.
Is that okay?
Yes.
Yep.
And Patty Thomas. Okay.
Pete and Patty.
So, yeah. As a
former chairman, by the way,
I'm just going to read a statement. Is that okay with the committee?
That's good.
The system of carbon credits is unfair and if
continued should take in native bush.
In my opinion, pine trees should be denied carbon credits as they are
not our native species. Also, they are exploited by overseas
conglomerates who pay no tax on the taxpayers' revenue they
receive. They also contaminate the soil structureAt
the rate farms in the north are being planted in pine trees, it will not be
very long before country towns close up shop
and it becomes a fire bomb in a dry summer.
It is my sincere hope that this petition is not fobbed off to some
quiet bureaucratic corner.
When we were getting the petition signed at the local farmers' market, it was
suggested to me that we start a protest movement against
pine trees. I said, "No, let us first follow the petition route and see
if we can get some action first." There's a huge
problem
on the matter of--
Oh,
hang on. I am asking the committee,
which I once chaired, to stand tall and strong and achieve across the floor of the
House a united front in obtaining legislation that remedies this
grave injustice to our nation. The young people are having their
inheritance stolen from them. This is our land and should not
be exploited by overseas interests.
Why should we bend the knee to greedy
foreigners?
So that's my statement. I'll get Pete now to give
you his. Yeah.
You might have to move around here in a minute.
Yeah.
Good morning,
this committee.
So I'm Pete Haynes. I'm a local farmer in the
area in Northland up here. I've just really come to
support Allan with his petition, and
we just believe that carbon credits for native trees on New Zealand
farms are justified because they incentivize
long-term carbon storage. They deliver significant
co-benefits,
both biodiversity, soil, and water, and make marginal land
economically viable,
and they also align with national climate and ecological goals.
While native trees grow more slowly than exotics, their permanent and
wider environmental value make them a higher integrity
form of carbon sequestration than current markets
would otherwise underprovide. So what we're saying there is that,
we believe that the
native trees are, although slower
sequestors of carbon, they still are valuable.
They still
soak up a whole lot of carbon, so there's no reason that they shouldn't be
included in the--
I'm losing my track here.
Go green.
And yeah, in the
lost it. Anyway, I'm going to pass over to Paddy, who has
also got something to say.
Good morning. Yeah, I'm Paddy Thornton, and I'm predominantly a dairy farmer in
Northland,
and have a
regenerated native sort of bush. There's probably 2 or
300 kauri trees in it, and I just feel we need to be
all fair. And at the moment, I don't think things are being
very fair. I'm also
the local fire chief, and we're under FENZ, and the
amount of trees that are growing now, if we get the right climate,
we will lose lives, and there's just no protection as
I understand.
Right.
Along with that, around me, I've got a
500-acre dairy farm on my boundary that's just going into pines,
and the wild pigs and stuff are just going to run
rampant, and they will really be a force to
be reckoned with in
destroying things.
Finally, I would like someone to do some real surveying
on the pine needles that are going into the Kaipara Harbour that I
feel that have destroyed our shellfish, the food for them.
The acidness of the pine needles, they'll float on a shower of rain.
They don't need a flood, and it's not the slash.
I feel it's the pine needles. I would like to see some sort
of
survey done to give us some clarity on that or why the
shellfish and that have sort of disappeared.
I'm here to support Allan and Pete, and
we've all got the same interests. I'll just hand you back to Allan now,
and we'll go from there. Thank you.
Over to you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes.
And the committee.
Right.
Thank you,
all three of you, for your submission.
We've got some questions starting with
Steve Abel.
Yeah, thank you very much, Allan,
and the other two of you, Pete and Paddy, for your points.
I just want to say that I think your concerns about pine
expansion
echo feelings that we've heard extensively from
the rural sector,
and certainly I think echo feelings that a lot of us have on, or a number of
us have on the committee,
including the fire risk,
including the problem of loss of arable land, but
also the loss of native biodiversity if it's
been cleared for pines.
And the other thing that
I think, certainly is my opinion and I think the opinion of others
perhaps, is that the value of native trees is
significant.
One proposal
that we as the Greens have is to take pines out of the emissions
trading scheme altogether, so that there's not a distortion that
incentivizes
pine forestry outside of their
core value as a
timber product.
But also a proposal to have a biodiversity fund which
recognizes not only carbon sequestration in native plants
or native trees, but also other biodiversity values that are
retained by maintenance of aA
kauri stand or a totara stand
on private land. Do you think that sort of a
biodiversity fund could,
which would be paid to landowners who are protecting biodiversity,
would serve a similar purpose that you're trying to achieve, Alan?
I think it would certainly help.
Yeah.
What do the other members think?
Absolutely.
Yeah, totally. Yep.
Yeah.
It sounds like a good plan.
Brilliant.
Thank you.
Look, I don't think,
I don't disagree with you
around the value of
whether it's regenerating or
old
forest, native
stands on farmland, because not only do you have
the
carbon capture and
the soil component to go with it, but you also have the native
biodiversity that
you don't tend to get under the-
Mm
... pine forest setups.
Question here. Do you want
the...
Would you be advocating for the ability for
these blocks of
forested land that you're talking about to be registered
in the ETS as opposed to pine trees?
Or as well as.
That,
well, as well.
Yeah, they'd have to be registered, wouldn't they, as well as pine trees.
Yeah.
The only issue with that, I guess, is that the, because some of the forestry you
would be talking about would be pre-1991, I assume.
'89.
Oh, '89.
Pre '89.
Yeah.
Is that right?
Yes.
Yeah.
So in which case, even if you did do that, it wouldn't be
covered because I think that excludes anything that was planted
pre-'89.
Look, what I do understand is the Ministry for the
Environment have been
doing some work in this area, and I don't know where
they've got with it, but we could certainly inquire-
Yeah
...
where they're up to in this space, because I think it's quite important
that,
like as the
three gentlemen have said, that the recognition and
the,
I suppose
financial contribution for looking after what
is essentially
very important part of
New Zealand
should be
encouraged
in-
Yes.
But yeah. But on top of that, we really,
it needs to be more than just a talk session.
We need some action because this matter has been hanging
around New Zealand for a long, long time, and a lot of people are really
concerned and distressed by it. And to see some
of the towns, the little country towns having to close up because of
huge pine forests,
is just frankly awful.
Yeah.
And yeah, I mean, that point
echoes points that have been made very powerfully across the
country. So you're certainly not shouting into a void there
in terms of that point.
And I think
many of us
in the political sphere are very concerned to find real
world solutions to that problem of
inappropriate pine expansion. And also
the corollary, which you're talking about, is protection of native biodiversity.
So it's-
And rural communities.
And rural communities, yeah.
That's had a devastating impact on them.
Look, there's a really good piece of work that the Parliamentary
Commissioner for the Environment has done.
I don't know if you're aware of it, Alan.
That was last year, I think.
He published,
and I can't remember the name of the report.
Alt-F.
Alt-F receipt, was it? Something like that.
But,
the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment's done some
pretty extensive work on it as well.
Look, we've just come to time, so I could
leave the last comments to you if you like, Alan.
Can
I move a point of order, Mr. Chairman, that we get an
extension of time?
Look, I'm sorry, Alan. We're really pushed for time
today.
However, we will keep you informed of
what our deliberation is around this issue.
Thank you. But I'll just pass the final comment to Pete, and then-
Yeah.
Yep
Can I just say we are grateful for the work that you are
already doing on this, so that we appreciate the
fact that you have put some limits on
the land that can be planted in trees, and we hope that you can
keep pushing ahead in this area and
put some protections in for the
surrounding landowners in terms of fire breaks and
water supplies for fire firefighting, those sorts of things.
So keep working hard on protecting
our native bush as well. So yeah, I
think you're doing a good job, just keep it going.
Thank you very much.
Final words. Thanks for your time and your contribution.
Yeah, Paddy here.
Thank you all for your time.
Thank you very much for what you're doing.
We really appreciate it.
I really appreciate what you've done.
Thank you.
Bearing that.
Are we off?
Very good. All right. So,
um